# 12. Resale and Strict Foreclosure

\*\*U.C.C.: \*\*Sections 9-610, 9-611, 9-613 to 9-617, 9-620 to 9-622, 9-625 to 9-627

\*\*Recorded Lectures and Online Quizzes: \*\*35. Resale; 36. Strict Foreclosure

\*\*Textbook: \*\*Chapter 12

## Resale

### Secured Party’s Right to Dispose of the Collateral

Under Section 9-610(a), a secured party has broad discretion in choosing the manner of disposing of collateral in order to realize proceeds that can be used to pay off the debt.

#### Section 9-610(a) Disposition after default.&#x20;

After default, a secured party may sell, lease, license or otherwise dispose of any or all of the collateral in its present condition or following any commercially reasonable preparation or processing.

### The Secured Party Must Give the Debtor and Others Reasonable Notice of Any Disposition

Before disposing of the collateral by means of resale or otherwise, the secured party must give notice to the debtor, any guarantors, and other secured parties who had perfected by filing or by compliance with a certificate of title law.

#### Section 9-611(b) Notification of disposition required.&#x20;

Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d), a secured party that disposes of collateral under section 9610 (relating to disposition of collateral after default) shall send to the persons specified in subsection (c) a reasonable authenticated notification of disposition.

### Notice of Public Sale and Notice of Private Sale

In the case of a **public sale**, the secured party must give the debtor and others notice of the time and place of the sale.

In the case of a **private sale**, the secured party must give the debtor and others notice of the time after which the collateral will be sold.

In cases that **do not involve consumer goods**, the notice is sufficient if it is sent 10 days or more before the disposition.

### The Resale Must Be Commercially Reasonable In Every Respect

#### Section 9-610(b) Commercially reasonable disposition.&#x20;

Every aspect of a disposition of collateral, including the method, manner, time, place and other terms, must be commercially reasonable. If commercially reasonable, a secured party may dispose of collateral by public or private proceedings, by one or more contracts, as a unit or in parcels and at any time and place and on any terms.

_**Example: The Piper Cub**_

Bangor Aero sold a small airplane to Darrell Sims for $50,000 on credit. Darrell fell behind in the payments, so a representative of Bangor came to the airport where it was located and flew the plane back to Bangor’s airport and stored the plane in a hanger. Nine months later, Bangor conducted an auction on the plane. The plane had sat idle the entire time and now needs to have a major overhaul to be flight ready. The only notice of the auction was a poster placed on the door of Bangor’s hanger that was put up 5 days before the auction. On the day of the auction a landslide blocked the main road into the airport where the auction was held. Darrell wasn’t given any notice of the sale. Bangor was the only bidder, and paid $5,000 for the plane, approximately 1/10th of its value on the day it was repossessed. Bangor then sued Darrell for $45,000, the amount of the deficiency.

_**Answer to “The Piper Cub”**_

No aspect of this sale was commercially reasonable. The seller did not exercise reasonable care in the custody of the airplane. The debtor wasn’t notified of the sale. The seller waited too long before conducting the sale, during which time the collateral declined in value. Only nominal public notice of the sale as given. In light of the landslide that blocked the main road the auction should have been postponed. The secured party was the only bidder, and while mere inadequacy of price is not in itself sufficient proof that a resale was commercially unreasonable, in these circumstances the low price is additional evidence that the sale was commercially unreasonable.

### Sue for Deficiency or Remit the Surplus

Under Section 9-615(d), once the collateral has been resold, the secured party may sue for any deficiency or must account to the debtor for any surplus.

#### Section 9-615(d)

(d) Surplus or deficiency if obligation secured. If the security interest under which a disposition is made secures payment or performance of an obligation, after making the payments and applications required by subsection (a) and permitted by subsection (c):

(1) unless subsection (a)(4) requires the secured party to apply or pay over cash proceeds to a consignor, the secured party shall account to and pay a debtor for any surplus; and (2) the obligor is liable for any deficiency.

### Burden of Proof

The secured party bears the burden of proving that a disposition of the collateral was commercially reasonable in all respects.

### Damages

Under Section 9-625(b), a secured party who fails to comply with the requirements on notice and resale is liable to the debtor or other creditors who suffered any loss as a result, as well as for statutory damages.

#### Section 9-625(b) Damages for noncompliance.&#x20;

Subject to subsections (c), (d) and (f), a person is liable for damages in the amount of any loss caused by a failure to comply with this division. Loss caused by a failure to comply may include loss resulting from the debtor's inability to obtain or increased costs of alternative financing.

### The “Rebuttable Presumption” and the “Absolute Bar” Rules

Under Section 9-626, in the case of non-consumer goods if the secured party is unable to prove that proper notice was given and that the resale of the collateral was commercially reasonable in all respects, then there arises a rebuttable presumption that the loss sustained as a result is equal to the deficiency owed by the debtor. The debtor is permitted to prove that its losses were even greater and that the debtor would have been entitled to a surplus if proper notice had been given and if the resale had been conducted in a commercially reasonable manner.

Article 9 does not specify what rule applies in cases involving consumer goods, but some courts have held that if notice and resale of consumer goods are not in compliance with the law, then the secured party is absolutely barred from recovering any deficiency.16

## Resale Summary

A secured party has broad discretion in choosing how to dispose of collateral in its possession. However, the secured party must give notice to the debtor and other parties regarding the disposition, and any disposition must be commercially reasonable. The secured party bears the burden of proving that proper notice was given and that the resale of the collateral was commercially reasonable in all respects. If the secured party is unable to meet this burden of proof, then the secured party is liable for any resulting loss. In the case of non-consumer goods if the notice or disposition fails to meet the required standard there arises a rebuttable presumption that the loss sustained as a result is equal to the deficiency owed by the debtor. With consumer goods, some courts have imposed an absolute bar on the right of the secured party to collect a deficiency.

## Strict Foreclosure

If the debtor consents, instead of reselling or otherwise disposing of the collateral a secured party may retain the collateral in full or partial satisfaction of the debt. This is called “strict foreclosure.”

However, there are a number of strict limitations on the exercise of the power of strict foreclosure. Several of these limitations involve the timing and manner of the debtor’s consent. There are additional limitations in cases where the collateral consists of consumer goods.

### Requirements Dealing with Consent

1. Under Section 9-620, in all cases involving strict foreclosure a secured party must obtain the consent of the debtor after default.
2. The debtor must consent to the strict foreclosure in an “authenticated record” (a signed writing) or the debtor must have failed to object within 20 days after the secured party sent the debtor an unconditional proposal of strict foreclosure.
3. Under Section 9-621, the secured party must notify and obtain consent from other secured parties who have filed a financing statement or who have listed a lien on a certificate of title or who have notified the secured party that they have a legal interest in the collateral. If the secured party wishes to retain the collateral in partial satisfaction of the debt, then it must also notify and obtain consent from any guarantor.

#### Section 9-620(c) Debtor's consent.&#x20;

(1) A debtor consents to an acceptance of collateral in partial satisfaction of the obligation it secures only if the debtor agrees to the terms of the acceptance in a record authenticated after default.&#x20;

(2) A debtor consents to an acceptance of collateral in full satisfaction of the obligation it secures only if the debtor agrees to the terms of the acceptance in a record authenticated after default or the secured party: (i) sends to the debtor after default a proposal which is unconditional or subject only to a condition that collateral not in the possession of the secured party be preserved or maintained; (ii) in the proposal, proposes to accept collateral in full satisfaction of the obligation it secures; and (iii) does not receive a notification of objection authenticated by the debtor within 20 days after the proposal is sent.

### Limitations and Requirements in Cases Involving Consumer Goods

1. If a debtor has paid 60% of the original debt on consumer goods, then the secured party may not use strict foreclosure; instead the secured party must resell the goods.
2. If the debtor has possession of consumer goods, the debtor may not consent to strict foreclosure; the collateral must be in the possession of the secured party before the debtor may consent to strict foreclosure.
3. A secured party may not accept strict foreclosure in partial satisfaction of a consumer debt. It’s all or nothing.

### Damages

Under Section 9-625, a secured party who fails to comply with Sections 9-620 to 9-622 in exercising its right to strict foreclosure on the collateral is liable to the debtor or other creditors who suffered loss as a result, as well as for statutory damages.

## Strict Foreclosure Summary

Under the doctrine of strict foreclosure, if the debtor and other secured parties or other parties with an interest in the collateral consent, a secured party may retain the collateral in full or partial satisfaction of the debt. The debtor’s consent must be obtained after default in the form of an authenticated record.

In the case of consumer goods, if a debtor has paid 60% of the original debt on consumer goods, then the secured party may not use strict foreclosure; the collateral must be in the possession of the secured party before the debtor may consent to strict foreclosure; and the secured party may not accept strict foreclosure in partial satisfaction of a consumer debt.
