# 1. Contracts & Employment Law

## Module 1 Overview and Resources

Fundamental.

## Module 2 Overview and Resources

### Overview

In this module, you will learn the special rules that apply to contracts for the sale of goods. A set of statutes, known as UCC Article 2, modifies the common law rules governing contract formation, and this module will detail those modifications. By the end of this module, you will be able to determine which contracts are governed by UCC Article 2 and how they differ from contracts that do not involve the sale of goods.

### Key Phrases/Concepts

Keep your eyes open for the following key terms or phrases as you interact with the lectures and complete the activities.

* Uniform Commercial Code Article 2
* Sales of goods
* Transfer of title to goods
* Risk of loss
* Express and implied warranties

### Guiding Questions

Develop your answers to the following guiding questions while watching lectures and working on assignments throughout the module.

* How does contract formation differ from the common law rules when dealing with an agreement to sell goods?
* When does ownership of goods transfer from the seller to the buyer?
* When does the risk of loss to goods transfer from the seller to the buyer?
* What happens when someone besides the owner of goods sells goods to a buyer?
* How are warranties formed in the context of a contract for the sale of goods?

{% file src="../../.gitbook/assets/Module 2 Lecture Transcript.pdf" %}

## Module 3 Overview and Resources

### Overview

In this module, we continue our discussion of contract law by focusing on the enforcement of agreements. We begin by examining _who_ can enforce contracts, then discuss _when _contracts can be enforced in court, and end by looking into _what types _of awards courts will grant when a party has been the victim of a breach of a contract. Throughout this module, we will call special attention to different rules that apply to contracts for the sale of goods.

### Key Phrases/Concepts

Keep your eyes open for the following key terms or phrases as you interact with the lectures and complete the activities.

* Intended and incidental beneficiaries
* Assignment of contractual rights
* Delegation of contractual duties
* Discharge of obligations by mutual agreement, conditions, breach, or operation of law
* Remedies for breach of contract

### Guiding Questions

Develop your answers to the following guiding questions while watching lectures and working on assignments throughout the module.

* When can a third party enforce a contract?
* When can parties to a contract transfer their rights and duties to third parties?
* How are a party’s contractual obligations discharged?
* What are the different levels of performance of a party’s contractual obligations?
* What remedies are available to the victim of a breach of contract under the common law and under UCC Article 2?

{% file src="../../.gitbook/assets/Module 3 Lecture Transcript.pdf" %}

## Module 4 Overview and Resources

### Overview

In this module, you will learn the foundations of the laws governing employees and employers. We begin with several lessons on the law of agency, which underpins all employment relationships. After that, we look at a series of laws that provide workers with various rights, including the right to unionize and take collective action as part of a labor union. By the end of this module, you will have a basic understanding of some of the fundamental rules that govern the employer-employee relationship.

### Key Phrases/Concepts

Keep your eyes open for the following key terms or phrases as you interact with the lectures and complete the activities.

* Agency
* Rights, duties, and liability of principals and agents
* Employee rights
* Formation of labor unions
* Labor actions and collective bargaining agreements

### Guiding Questions

Develop your answers to the following guiding questions while watching lectures and working on assignments throughout the module.

* How can one person give another person authority to act on his or her behalf?
* How do principals and agents interact with one another?
* When are principals and agents liable for the conduct of one another?
* What rights do employees have with respect to safety and working conditions?
* What rights do employees have to be free from discrimination in the workplace?
* When can employees organize together and collectively bargain for better terms of employment?

{% file src="../../.gitbook/assets/Module 4 Lecture Transcript.pdf" %}
