# Federal Legislative Power

## Constitutional Structure of Legislative Power

One of the central respects in which the Constitution departed from the Articles of Confederation, the charter that governed the United States in its first decade of independence, was to ensure that the federal government had coercive regulatory power on matters of federal concern. To that end, Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution includes eighteen different clauses enumerating Congress’s regulatory powers, on topics ranging from coining money and establishing post offices, to creating legal rules to govern bankruptcy, copyright, and patent cases, to raising armies and declaring war. In subsequent lessons, we will explore some of these enumerated powers in more detail.

To alleviate concerns that the new Congress would thereby claim authority as sweeping as that exercised by the British Parliament, the Constitution also limits Congress to exercising only those legislative powers, quote, “herein granted,” unquote. In other words, the powers specifically listed in the eighteen clauses of Article I, Section 8, and in any subsequent amendments, are meant to be exhaustive, such that every single provision of every statute enacted into law by Congress can be traced to one of those eighteen provisions.&#x20;

## _McCulloch v. Maryland_

At the founding, this structure provoked a sustained debate between the Constitution’s supporters and its detractors over whether Congress could nevertheless exercise any implied powers. The flashpoint for that debate was the First National Bank, which Congress created in 1791 to help the United States establish credit and otherwise stabilize its finances. No provision in Article I, Section 8, said anything about chartering a bank. Did the bank therefore demonstrate that the powers listed in Article I, Section 8 were not exhaustive, or was the bank unconstitutional?

In _McCulloch versus Maryland_, the Supreme Court decided that question in the context of the First National Bank’s successor, the Second National Bank, after Maryland imposed a tax on the bank, and the bank refused to pay. As part of his explanation for why Maryland’s tax on a federal institution was unconstitutional, Chief Justice John Marshall specifically sustained Congress’s power to create a national bank. The key, as Marshall wrote, was the very last of the powers enumerated in Article I, Section 8, the Necessary and Proper Clause, which gives Congress the power, quote, “to make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution,” unquote, the powers otherwise vested by the Constitution.&#x20;

Although the Constitution did not give Congress the power to charter a bank, it did give Congress the powers to lay and collect taxes, to pay debts, to borrow money, and to coin money. And the Necessary and Proper Clause, Marshall explained, was not meant as a limit on Congress’s other enumerated powers, but rather to give Congress discretion in choosing **how** to best exercise those powers. So long as the end Congress is seeking to fulfill is constitutionally legitimate, Marshall concluded, quote, “all means which are appropriate, which are plainly adapted to that end, which are not prohibited, but consist with the letter and spirit of the Constitution, are Constitutional,” endquote. Thus, Congress has the implied power to choose the means through which to carry into effect its enumerated powers. For example, Congress’s power to create post offices and post roads also allows it not only to create the U.S. Postal Service, but also to make interference with the mail a federal criminal offense. And more generally, _McCulloch_ stands for the proposition that the Constitution confers significant discretion upon Congress to choose how best to implement its powers. In practice, this has led the Supreme Court to recognize that most statutes come with a presumption of constitutionality.

The _McCulloch_ decision is significant not only because of how it interpreted the Necessary and Proper Clause, but because, as part of that analysis, it also reaffirmed that the federal government, quote, “though limited in its powers, is supreme within its sphere of action,” unquote. This followed, Marshall explained, from both the text of the Constitution and the means by which it was ratified, because the Constitution derives its powers not from individual states, but from, quote, “**we the people**,” unquote. And although the Constitution was ratified one state at a time, it was not ratified by the state governments themselves, but by popular conventions within each state. To Marshall, the Constitution reflected the principle that the people of the United States, rather than the people of any individual state, were sovereign. As a result, a state could not impose a tax that discriminated against a federal institution, and so Maryland’s tax on the national bank was unconstitutional.

As we will learn in a future lesson, the Constitution’s Supremacy Clause stipulates that valid federal law is supreme to state law, including state constitutional provisions. But Chief Justice Marshall’s opinion in _McCulloch_ provides the analytical underpinnings for the validity of the Supremacy Clause itself, and is, in that respect, among the Supreme Court’s most important rulings with respect to the relationship between the federal government and the states. Because of _McCulloch_, most of the contemporary debate over the constitutionality of federal regulation rises and falls on whether the regulation is a valid means of exercising one of Congress’s enumerated powers.

## The Commerce Clause

The Interstate Commerce Clause is the source of Congress’s power to prescribe laws on subjects ranging from federal criminal law, to civil rights, to environmental protection, to securities regulation. As the Supreme Court has evolved over time, so too has its understanding of the full scope of Congress’s power in this area. In recent decades especially, the Interstate Commerce Clause has been an especially sensitive flashpoint for the broader debate over how principles of federalism and state sovereignty do and should constrain the federal government’s power.

### I. _Gibbons v. Ogden_

The fountainhead Supreme Court decision interpreting the Interstate Commerce Clause was _Gibbons versus Ogden_, which arose out of a steamboat monopoly granted to Ogden by the New York legislature. Ogden sued Gibbons, claiming that Gibbons’s competing ferry service violated the monopoly. Gibbons responded that, because he was licensed under a 1793 federal statute that governed vessels, quote, “in the coasting trade,” unquote, the federal license superseded the state monopoly. The Supreme Court sided with Gibbons after upholding the 1793 federal statute.&#x20;

In the process, _Gibbons_ established three important interpretations of the Interstate Commerce Clause that are still followed today: First, commerce in the Interstate Commerce Clause does not just mean the buying and selling of goods, but also the, quote, “intercourse,” unquote, in them. That is, commerce means all aspects of a commercial enterprise, from production and manufacture to transportation and sale. Second, the Interstate Commerce Clause applies to more than just commerce **between** the states, but it does not apply to all commerce **within** states. Instead, the Court reached a middle-ground definition, holding that Congress may regulate all commerce that has interstate effects. Finally, the Court rejected Ogden’s argument that state sovereignty interposed its own limit on the Interstate Commerce Clause, holding that Congress’s power under the Interstate Commerce Clause is complete unto itself. A statute that is valid under the Interstate Commerce Clause, like any other statute enacted pursuant to Congress’s enumerated powers, can only be unconstitutional if it offends some other express constitutional rule.

### II. _United States v. Darby _and_ Wickard v. Filburn_

Although the Supreme Court took a somewhat narrower view of the Interstate Commerce Clause between the Civil War and the 1930s, the modern doctrine has its roots in the New Deal, when the Court embraced a broader understanding of Congress’s power. For instance, in _United States versus Darby_, the Court unanimously upheld a federal statute imposing maximum-hour and minimum-wage requirements for all workers involved in interstate commerce. Even though the workers were not commerce themselves, and even though Congress was not regulating the manufacture of goods, it sufficed that hours and wages of employees would substantially affect interstate commerce. One year later, in _Wickard versus Filburn_, the Court took the substantial-effects idea an important step further, holding that Congress had the power to impose a quota for wheat even on an individual farmer whose output could not possibly affect interstate commerce. Because the activity of farmers like Filburn would produce a substantial effect on interstate commerce in the aggregate, the Court held, they could therefore all be regulated by Congress.

_Darby_ and _Filburn_ opened the door to a new era of expansive use of the Interstate Commerce Clause by Congress, especially in the civil-rights context. Because of limits on Congress’s powers to enforce the post-Civil War amendments, the Interstate Commerce Clause became a more attractive vehicle for regulating, among other things, discrimination based upon race and sex in places of public accommodation, workplaces, and educational institutions. And in _Heart of Atlanta Motel versus United States _and _Katzenbach versus McClung_, the Supreme Court upheld this use of the Interstate Commerce Clause, holding that it didn’t matter that commerce was clearly the means Congress was using, not an end unto itself. Instead, because Congress based these provisions of its civil-rights legislation on detailed evidence that these types of discrimination produced a substantial economic effect, they were valid exercises of Congress’s power under the Interstate Commerce Clause.&#x20;

As these cases demonstrate, the increasing ease with which individuals and goods move across state lines as compared to at the founding bears directly upon the scope of Congress’s power to regulate commerce. And although it has been criticized for its breadth by at least some more recent justices, the substantial-effects test remains the law today. In _Gonzales versus Raich_, for example, the Court held that Congress had the power to prohibit a single individual from growing marijuana on her own property for her own consumption, because, per _Filburn_, that economic activity in the aggregate substantially affects interstate commerce.

### III. Recent Cases

Instead, the Supreme Court’s retrenchment of the Interstate Commerce Clause in recent years has come in two more specific contexts. First, the Court has held that the Interstate Commerce Clause does not allow Congress to regulate non-economic activity. For example, _United States versus Lopez_ invalidated a federal statute that made it a crime to be in possession of a firearm within a certain radius of a school, holding that, even if guns were themselves commerce, their possession near schools produced at most an indirect effect on interstate commerce.&#x20;

Second, the Court has held that the Interstate Commerce Clause does not allow Congress to regulate economic inactivity. In _N-F-I-B versus Sebelius_, a majority held that Congress could not, as part of its power to regulate commerce, require individuals to maintain a minimum level of health insurance. Although the consumption of medical services by uninsured Americans unquestionably has a substantial effect on interstate commerce, the Court held that this type of inaction wasn’t the kind of commerce that Congress was allowed to regulate. The same provision was instead upheld under Congress’s tax power.

## Enumerated Article I Powers

### I. Powers to Tax and Spend

One of the central defects of the Articles of Confederation was that the central government had no power to tax, and therefore little money to spend. To that end, the very first regulatory powers granted to Congress in Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution are the powers to tax and spend. Although neither power is unlimited, both bestow upon Congress authority to regulate a far broader class of conduct than it can reach through the Commerce Clause. In essence, Congress’s powers to tax and spend allow it to achieve substantive outcomes by incentivizing, or disincentivizing, the substantive activity at issue.

In _United States versus Butler_, 297 U.S. 1 (1936), the Supreme Court held that Congress can tax and spend for purposes beyond those specifically enumerated in the rest of Article I, Section 8. So long as the tax or the expenditure is in the, quote, “**general welfare**,” unquote, it will not be unconstitutional solely because the conduct it is regulating or incentivizing is beyond Congress’s power to directly compel. Thus, for example, the Supreme Court held that a federal law conditioning a state’s receipt of federal highway money on the state raising its drinking age to 21 was a valid exercise of Congress’s Spending Clause authority. In enacting the law, Congress was attempting to promote uniformity in states’ drinking ages to combat the problem of underage drinking and driving. Even though Congress could not directly impose a national drinking age, and even though there is, at best, a loose relationship between underage drinking and highway funds, the Court found that, quote, “\[t]he means \[Congress] chose to address this dangerous situation were reasonably calculated to advance the general welfare,” unquote. _South Dakota v. Dole_, 483 U.S. 203, 208 (1987). Congress exceeds its Spending Clause authority only if the spending condition is itself unconstitutional, if it bears no relationship whatsoever to the funds being spent, or if it is so unduly coercive as to not leave the recipient with a meaningful choice over whether or not to accept the funds. _See id._; _see also Nat’l Fed’n of Indep. Bus. v. Sebelius_, 567 U.S. 519 (2012).

In theory, Congress’s power to tax is subject to additional constraints. For instance, Article I, Section 2 of the Constitution requires, quote, “direct taxes,” unquote, to be apportioned among the states. Among other things, this provision led the Supreme Court to declare the federal income tax to be unconstitutional, although that ruling was overturned by the Sixteenth Amendment. _See_ U.S. Const. amend. XVI; _Pollock v. Farmers’ Loan & Tr. Co._, 157 U.S. 429 (1895). Since then, the Supreme Court has construed the term narrowly, so that nothing short of a national property tax is likely to be deemed a direct tax triggering the apportionment requirement. Instead, most federal taxes are indirect taxes, which need only be in the general welfare and uniform throughout the country, such that rates imposed by Congress do not vary from state to state. Therefore, the principal check on Congress’s power to tax is not the Constitution itself, but the **political** unpopularity of any laws that impose new taxes. _See Nat’l Fed’n of Indep. Bus. v. Sebelius_, 567 U.S. 519 (2012).

### II. Powers Pertaining to War, the Military, and Foreign Affairs

Article I, Section 8 gives Congress a number of other regulatory powers, including powers over immigration, intellectual property, post offices, lower federal courts, coining money, and so on. But by volume, the most numerous of Congress’s enumerated powers are those pertaining to war, the military, and foreign affairs, which occupy seven of Section 8’s eighteen clauses. Foremost among these are Congress’s power to declare war, its central role in raising and regulating the federal military, and its power to authorize the president to, quote, “call forth,” unquote, the militia of the several states in certain emergency situations. This last provision has been interpreted as the principal constitutional authority for the involuntary conscription of servicemembers through a draft. _See The Selective Draft Law Cases_, 245 U.S. 366 (1918). And unlike any other appropriation of federal funds, all military appropriations are limited by the Constitution to a term of two years, ensuring that each successive Congress must vote to continue to fund the military.

Unlike Congress’s powers to regulate commerce, tax, and spend, however, the principal question surrounding its powers over military and foreign affairs is not whether the matter at issue is subject to federal regulation rather than state control. Instead, it is how the Constitution demarcates the line in such clearly federal spheres between Congress’s authority and that of the president. After all, although Congress has the power to raise armies, the Constitution makes the president the, quote, “Commander in Chief,” unquote. Thus, although Congress can often assert its authority over the president by cutting spending through its unquestioned power of the purse, efforts by Congress to impose additional, substantive constraints on the president in matters of military or foreign affairs tend to provoke serious constitutional debates over the proper separation of powers. The president’s power to use offensive military force without prior congressional authorization will be discussed in more detail in another lesson.

Finally, the Constitution also contemplates a specific role for the Senate in two contexts touching directly on foreign affairs. First, a treaty only becomes law of the land if it is approved by two-thirds of the Senate, one of only a handful of supermajority requirements in the Constitution. Second, the Senate must also give its advice and consent to all ambassadors nominated by the President. Thus, as the Supreme Court has explained, quote, “\[a]lthough there is in the Constitution no specific grant to Congress of power to enact legislation for the effective regulation of foreign affairs, there can be no doubt of the existence of this power in the lawmaking organ of the nation,” unquote. _Perez v. Brownell_, 356 U.S. 44, 62 (1958).

## Power to Enforce the Reconstruction Amendments

### I. Legislation

Like most of the other constitutional amendments that create new substantive rights, the Reconstruction Amendments each include language bestowing upon Congress the power to enforce their substantive prohibitions **by appropriate legislation**. At a minimum, these enforcement clauses allow Congress to prohibit by statute the same conduct that the amendments themselves forbid. And the purpose of these provisions was to allow Congress to legislate prophylactically, to prevent constitutional violations by preempting state and local laws that **might** be unconstitutional even before they could potentially be struck down by the courts. The harder question is just how far the enforcement clauses allow Congress to go. In other words, how much conduct that is not itself unconstitutional can Congress prohibit in the name of enforcing the Constitution?

### II. Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments

For example, Section 1 of the Thirteenth Amendment abolishes slavery and involuntary servitude, except as punishment for a duly prosecuted crime. The Supreme Court has held that in enforcing the Thirteenth Amendment under Section 2, its enforcement clause, Congress may prohibit not only slavery, but also other forms of discrimination based upon race that constitute, quote, “badges and incidents of slavery,” unquote. The key is whether Congress was legislating to prohibit private interference in the civil rights that the abolition of slavery was meant to restore. Thus, in _Jones versus Alfred H. Mayer Company_, 392 U.S. 409 (1968), the Supreme Court held that in prohibiting racial discrimination in the private sale and leasing of residential property, Congress was acting pursuant to its power to enforce the Thirteenth Amendment, even though the discrimination was not itself slavery.

Whereas Congress’s power to enforce the Thirteenth Amendment is limited to eliminating badges and incidents of slavery, its power to enforce the Fourteenth Amendment under Section 5 of that provision is, like the Amendment itself, broader in substance. As you will learn in a future lesson, the Fourteenth Amendment not only creates new rights against states, but it has also been interpreted to incorporate much of the Bill of Rights against the states. It does so through four different rights: a right to citizenship, a right against being denied the privileges or immunities of that citizenship by states, a right not to be denied due process by states, and a right not to be deprived by states of the equal protection of the laws. As a result, in enforcing the Fourteenth Amendment, Congress is allowed not only to enforce that amendment’s substantive protections, but also the protections of the first ten Amendments that also apply to the states. Thus, Congress has the power to preempt a wide array of state and local regulations on the ground that their displacement is necessary to avoid violating any number of different constitutional provisions. For example, when Congress prohibited the imposition of literacy tests as a prerequisite to voting in state or federal elections, even though the Constitution itself does not bar all such tests, the Supreme Court upheld the measure under Congress’s power to enforce the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. _See Oregon v. Mitchell_, 400 U.S. 112 (1970).

The Supreme Court has identified two major constraints on Congress’s power to enforce the Fourteenth Amendment. First, it may not use that power to regulate private conduct. As the Court held in the _Civil Rights Cases_, 109 U.S. 3 (1883), because the substantive provisions of the Fourteenth Amendment only impose limits on states, Congress in enforcing the Fourteenth Amendment may only regulate **state** **action**. The state action doctrine, which a future lesson covers in more detail, means that Congress can’t directly apply the Fourteenth Amendment to private actors, and also that it can’t do so indirectly by prohibiting state **in**action. _See, e.g._, _United States v. Morrison_, 529 U.S. 598 (2000).

&#x20;Second, even when regulating state action, a statute enacted under Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment must be **congruent and proportional** to the underlying constitutional violation. _City of Boerne v. Flores_, 521 U.S. 507 (1997). In essence, there must be a significant relationship, and not just a plausible one, between the constitutional violation that Congress is seeking to prevent and the regulation it is imposing in order to prevent it. Since the Supreme Court articulated this high standard in 1997, it has identified only a handful of statutes that meet it.

### III. Fifteenth Amendment

Finally, Congress also has the power to enforce the more specific prohibition in Section 1 of the Fifteenth Amendment, which bars states from abridging citizens’ rights to vote based upon their, quote, “race, color, or previous condition of servitude,” unquote. This authority was the driving force behind the Voting Rights Act, which, among other things, created a preclearance regime in jurisdictions with a history of voting-related racial discrimination. Under this system, any changes to election laws had to first be approved by the Justice Department or a federal court before they could go into effect. In _Shelby County versus Holder_, 570 U.S. 2 (2013), however, the Supreme Court struck down the formula Congress had used to identify which jurisdictions should be subjected to preclearance. The Court held that because the data was outdated and hadn’t been updated when Congress most recently reenacted the statute, it violated the states’ equal sovereignty by holding different states to different federal requirements for changes to election laws without a sufficiently compelling justification. However, the Court did not explain whether it was applying the congruence and proportionality test, or whether some other standard applied. It is therefore unclear exactly what test governs a statute enacted to enforce the Fifteenth Amendment.

## 10th Amendment Limitations on Congress's Authority

### NY v US

**Holding and Reasoning (O’Connor, J.)**

Congress may not compel states to enact or administer a federal regulatory program.There are two ways Congress may urge a state to adopt a legislative program consistent with federal interests: (1) as part of its spending powers, Congress may attach conditions on states’ receipt of federal funds, or (2) where Congress has the authority to regulate private activity under the Commerce Clause, Congress may offer states the choice of regulating that same activity according to federal regulations or having state law preempted by federal regulations. These options allow states to decline compliance with federal regulatory standards if state citizens decide a federal policy is contrary to local interests.

**Concurrence/Dissent (White, J.)**

The Act does not violate the Tenth Amendment because it represents a compromise worked out between and among the states with Congress as a referee.

**Concurrence/Dissent (Stevens, J.)**

The federal government already regulates state actions in the administration of various environmental programs, public services, military drafts, and a host of other state functions. No distinction exists between Congress’s ability to regulate these programs according to federal standards and its ability to enforce federal standards for the disposition of low-level radioactive waste.

### Printz v US

### Reno v Condon

### Murphy v NCAA

## Congress's Power to Tax and Spend

### For what purposes?

### US v Butler

### Chas. C. Steward Machine Company v Davis

### Sabri v US

### Conditions on Grants to State Governments

### South Dakota v Dole

## Congress's Power Under the Post-Civil War Amendments

#### Whom may Congress regulate under these amendments?

### US v Morrison

#### What is the Scope of Congress's Power?

### Katzenbach v Morgan and Morgan

### City of Boerne v Flores

### Shelby County, Alabama v Holder
