# Federal Judicial Power

## The Supreme Court and the Constitutional System

### I. Federal Legal System

Like all constitutional law courses, this course devotes most of its time to studying how the U.S. Supreme Court has interpreted the federal Constitution, including both the original Constitution ratified in 1788 and the 27 amendments to the Constitution that have been ratified between the Bill of Rights in 1791 and today. The Supreme Court isn’t the only body that interprets the Constitution and other federal laws. Congress has a say when it decides which laws to enact, the President has a say through his powers to both veto laws and exercise at least some discretion in enforcing them, and lower federal and state courts have a say, as well. But the Supreme Court typically gets the last word. As Justice Robert H. Jackson wrote of the Court in 1953, quote, “we are not final because we are infallible, but we are infallible only because we are final,” unquote. This lesson focuses on the source of that finality and its implications.

### II. Judicial Branch

Article III of the Constitution establishes the judicial branch and vests “the judicial power of the United States” in one Supreme Court and in any “inferior” federal courts that Congress chooses to create, such as the federal district courts at the trial level and the circuit courts of appeals. Other than requiring a chief justice, the Constitution leaves the number of seats on the Supreme Court to Congress. At the founding, there were six justices. That number fluctuated throughout the nineteenth century and has been fixed at nine since 1869. Like judges on the lower federal courts, each justice is appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the Senate. Once confirmed, Article III preserves the independence of these judges and justices by providing that they continue to hold their offices, perhaps for life, during good behavior, and by protecting their salaries from being diminished while they remain in office. Indeed, the only way a Supreme Court justice or other Article III judge can be removed from office is through the same impeachment process that applies to the President. No justice has ever been removed in this way.

### III. _Marbury v. Madison_

Perhaps the most important decision regarding the Supreme Court’s role in our constitutional system is the Court’s 1803 ruling in _Marbury versus Madison_. In that case, Chief Justice John Marshall first recognized the power of judicial review, that is, the power of a court to strike down a law or executive branch action on the ground that it violates the Constitution. Specifically, _Marbury_ held that a part of the Judiciary Act of 1789 that allowed the Supreme Court to issue a writ of mandamus directly to an executive branch officer violated the provision of Article III regulating which lawsuits can go directly to the Supreme Court. The problem, Marshall concluded, was that even though the Constitution specifies that a case can begin in the Supreme Court only if it involves a foreign ambassador or U.S. state, Congress had also authorized the Supreme Court to go first in mandamus cases, in which a private party sought an order directing an executive branch official to perform a mandatory legal duty. Thus, the federal statute seemed squarely at odds with the text of the Constitution. And there would be little point in having a written Constitution, or a Supreme Court to interpret it, if a court determines that a statute is in tension with the Constitution but is powerless to do anything about it. As Marshall famously concluded, quote, “\[i]t is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is,” unquote.

### IV. _Martin v. Hunter’s Lessee_

Throughout the nineteenth century, judicial review of federal laws was generally uncontroversial and rare. But judicial review of **state** laws was more contested, with supreme courts in several states concluding that the federal Supreme Court couldn’t review their final rulings, even on federal constitutional matters. In _Martin versus Hunter’s Lessee_, the Supreme Court rejected that position. In upholding the federal law that gives the Supreme Court the power to hear appeals from state courts in cases presenting questions of federal law, _Martin_ concluded that the structure of the Constitution and the need for uniformity on questions of federal law compelled the conclusion that judicial review was available for state statutes and executive actions. Indeed, if the Supreme Court couldn’t review state-court interpretations of federal law, it might not make sense to allow state courts to interpret federal law in the first place.&#x20;

Taken together, _Marbury_ and _Martin_ cemented the Supreme Court’s central role in interpreting the federal Constitution, and, if necessary and appropriate, in striking down state and federal legislative acts it determines to be inconsistent with that charter. And because the Supreme Court generally has the last word on questions of constitutional interpretation, it treats its own decisions interpreting the Constitution as part of the Constitution itself. For example, in _Miranda versus Arizona_, the Court held that part of the right against self-incrimination protected by the Fifth Amendment includes a right to warnings from the police before an interrogation. Because this rule was not grounded in the text of the Self-Incrimination Clause, Congress tried to set it aside by statute. The Supreme Court held that Congress could not do so, because the _Miranda_ decision itself, and not just the Self-Incrimination Clause it interpreted, was a constitutional rule.

As a result, constitutional interpretations by the Supreme Court can only be undone through one of two mechanisms, either a subsequent Supreme Court decision overruling the earlier one or a constitutional amendment. And in its history, only four of the Court’s decisions have been overruled by amendment. Thus, although every government actor plays some role in the exposition of federal constitutional law

## Article III and Federal Jurisdiction

### I. Article III

Article III, Section 2 of the Constitution recognizes nine types of cases or controversies that Congress may empower a federal court to hear, commonly referred to as the “nine heads” of federal jurisdiction. The most familiar are cases arising under the Constitution, laws, and treaties of the United States, a subset of which are the federal question cases taught in Civil Procedure classes, and controversies between citizens of different states, a subset of which are the diversity cases taught in Civil Procedure. Congress has never conferred upon the federal courts the full scope of the jurisdiction Article III authorizes. For example, due to the statutory amount-in-controversy requirement, a diversity case today in which the amount in controversy is less than $75,000 can never make it to a federal court, even though it is a controversy between citizens of different states. More importantly, Congress may not confer upon the federal courts jurisdiction that goes beyond the nine heads.

### II. Eleventh Amendment

The only constitutional constraint on Congress’s power to confer jurisdiction upon the federal courts besides those contained within Article III is the Eleventh Amendment, adopted in 1798 in response to the Supreme Court’s decision in _Chisholm versus Georgia_. _Chisholm_involved a state-law suit by a South Carolina citizen against the State of Georgia directly in the U.S. Supreme Court. Three of the four justices held the suit could go forward, while the dissenting justice argued Georgia was entitled to sovereign immunity. In response, the Eleventh Amendment provides that, quote, “The judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the United States by citizens of another state, or by citizens or subjects of any foreign state,” unquote. The Supreme Court has read this text not only to bar lawsuits like the diversity suit in _Chisholm_, but also to bar suits by a citizen of the **same** state against his state and to bar federal-question suits against a state, as well. So construed, the Eleventh Amendment recognizes the sovereign immunity states possess from private suit in federal court.&#x20;

Under the Eleventh Amendment as interpreted by the Supreme Court, a state cannot be sued by a private plaintiff in federal court unless it consents to the suit, or Congress has validly abrogated the state’s immunity. The Supreme Court has recognized Congress’s ability to abrogate state sovereign immunity only pursuant to its powers under the Enforcement Clauses of the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments and the Bankruptcy Clause of Article I. Otherwise, a statute that purports to subject a nonconsenting state to suit in federal court exceeds the scope of Article III as amended by the Eleventh Amendment. And although the text of the Eleventh Amendment is limited to federal jurisdiction, the Supreme Court has held that the Constitution implicitly bars suits in state courts and federal administrative agencies, as well. However, states do not have sovereign immunity in federal court if the plaintiff is the federal government or another state .

### III. Original Jurisdiction

In addition to identifying the nine heads of federal jurisdiction, Article III also spells out in which of those cases the Supreme Court may exercise its original jurisdiction to hear a suit that did not begin in a lower court. Under Article III, Section 2, only cases involving foreign ambassadors and those in which a state is a party may begin in the Supreme Court. And as the Supreme Court held in _Marbury versus Madison_, Congress cannot add to that list. Accordingly, most cases come to the Supreme Court through its appellate jurisdiction.

### IV. Appellate Jurisdiction

Article III allows Congress to give the Supreme Court appellate jurisdiction over any case or controversy falling within the nine heads. But if the dispute comes from a state court, Congress has imposed a significant additional limit by statute, allowing the Supreme Court to review a decision only if there is no adequate or independent state ground supporting the state-court ruling under review. After all, because a state supreme court has the last word on the meaning of state law, a state-court ruling that can be affirmed solely on a state-law ground would leave the U.S. Supreme Court with no ability to reach a different outcome.&#x20;

For example, if a state supreme court throws out a law-enforcement search on the ground that it **separately** violated both the state constitution and the Fourth Amendment, the U.S. Supreme Court lacks the power to review that decision because it lacks the power to reverse the state court’s interpretation of its own constitution. But if that same state court interprets its state constitution as a precise counterpart to the Fourth Amendment, the state ground is not independent, and the Supreme Court **can** review that decision.

Finally, Article III says nothing about whether the Supreme Court must hear every appeal Congress authorizes, known as mandatory appellate jurisdiction, or whether it may choose which appeals it wants to hear. Historically, the Supreme Court’s appellate jurisdiction was largely mandatory. Congress has gradually broadened the Court’s discretion by statute, favoring the writ of _certiorari_ as a vehicle through which the justices can decide whether an appeal is sufficiently worthy of their attention. Under current statutes, almost all of the Supreme Court’s appellate jurisdiction is discretionary. The only exception is for appeals from three-judge district courts, which are specialized trial courts that hear campaign finance, gerrymandering, and other election-related lawsuits. With the rise of the Supreme Court’s discretion has come a gradual reduction in the number of cases it hears. Whether the shrinking size of the docket increases the Court’s responsibility to issue broad pronouncements in those cases it chooses to hear remains a matter of significant debate.

## Congress's Power Over Federal Jurisdiction

### I. Limits on Congress's Power over the Federal Courts

That Congress has broad authority over the jurisdiction of the lower federal courts and the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court does not mean that its authority is absolute. Instead, courts have identified three limits on Congress’s power over the federal courts.

#### First, Congress cannot exercise its power over federal jurisdiction in a way that is itself unconstitutional, whether because it violates Article III or some other constitutional provision.&#x20;

For example, in _Boumediene versus Bush_, the Supreme Court struck down an act of Congress purporting to bar the lower federal courts from entertaining petitions for writs of habeas corpus in which non-citizens detained as, quote, “enemy combatants,” unquote, sought to challenge the legality of their detention by the executive branch without criminal charges at Guantánamo Bay. At issue was whether Congress had violated the Suspension Clause, a provision in Article I of the Constitution that provides that the writ of habeas corpus cannot be suspended except in cases of rebellion or invasion when public safety may require it. After concluding that the Suspension Clause has full effect at Guantánamo, the Court held that Congress violated that provision by taking away the federal courts’ habeas jurisdiction in these cases without providing an adequate alternative means for detainees to challenge their detention.&#x20;

#### Second, Congress cannot exercise its power over federal jurisdiction in a way that expressly dictates how the federal courts should resolve a pending case.&#x20;

For example, in _United States versus Klein_, the Supreme Court struck down a statute that not only purported to take away the Court’s jurisdiction over a pending case, but also went further and directed that all lawsuits affected by the statute be dismissed, preventing the courts from deciding whether the withdrawal of jurisdiction was itself constitutional. Of course, Congress is free to change the law in a manner that will necessarily lead a court to rule for one party over another. But _Klein_ held that it violates the separation of powers for Congress to do the courts’ job for them.

#### Third, Congress cannot provide for extrajudicial revision of federal courts’ final judgments by either the executive or legislative branch.&#x20;

For example, Congress cannot authorize an executive branch official to review and, if necessary, set aside judgments reached by the federal courts in cases involving veterans’ pensions. Nor can Congress authorize plaintiffs to reopen federal legal judgments after they have become final. As Justice Scalia once wrote, Article III, quote, “gives the Federal Judiciary the power, not merely to rule on cases, but to **decide** them, subject to review only by superior courts in the Article III hierarchy,” unquote.&#x20;

### II. Delegating Adjudicatory Power

In addition to controlling the jurisdiction of the lower federal courts and the Supreme Court’s appellate jurisdiction, Congress also has some latitude to delegate adjudicatory power to federal administrative agencies and non-Article III federal courts.&#x20;

Even though Article III seems to imply that all bodies exercising the judicial power of the United States must be tribunals staffed by judges with Article III’s salary and tenure protections, the Supreme Court has recognized three contexts in which adjudication by non-Article III federal decision makers is permissible.&#x20;

1. Congress may establish non-Article III federal courts, staffed by judges who lack Article III’s tenure and salary protections, to resolve disputes in the federal territories.&#x20;
2. Congress may establish non-Article III federal courts to resolve offenses arising out of the military or to prosecute war crimes committed by enemy belligerents.&#x20;
3. Congress may establish non-Article III courts or administrative adjudicative mechanisms to resolve disputes arising from or incident to public rights.&#x20;

## Article III Justiciability Doctrines

### I. Ripeness

Ripeness is best understood as a doctrine about the timing of a lawsuit and whether the plaintiff has prematurely sought to challenge the defendant’s alleged misconduct. As a general proposition, speculative or hypothetical injuries will usually fail to satisfy the injury-in-fact prong of standing doctrine. Ripeness, in contrast, more typically focuses on when a party may seek pre-enforcement review of a statute or regulation. In those cases, the injury for standing purposes arises from the future enforcement of the challenged statute or regulation, and the analysis shifts to the consequences of the mere specter of the future enforcement. As the Supreme Court has explained, courts should assess, quote, “the fitness of the issues for judicial decision and the hardship to the parties of withholding court consideration,” unquote. The greater the hardship to the parties from waiting for the challenged regulation or statute to enter into force, the more likely a pre-enforcement challenge will be entertained. And unlike other justiciability doctrines, an absence of ripeness can usually be cured simply by waiting for the statute or regulation to enter into force.

### II. Mootness

At the other end of the spectrum, mootness doctrine focuses on when external events that take place subsequent to the filing of a lawsuit serve to resolve the underlying claim before the courts have done so. Mootness can arise when, depending upon the relief being sought, a party dies, the parties settle their dispute, a challenged law is repealed, and so on. In those circumstances, judicial resolution of the dispute would be tantamount to issuing an impermissible advisory opinion. Thus, a case becomes moot when there is no longer a live dispute for the federal courts to resolve.

Unlike the other justiciability doctrines, though, the Supreme Court has repeatedly noted the flexibility of the mootness doctrine, as reflected in the four exceptions that it has identified. First, an otherwise moot case should not be dismissed if it is likely to produce collateral consequences. For example, a convicted criminal can continue to appeal his conviction even after he has finished serving his sentence because of the continuing consequences the conviction could have for, among other things, his future employment prospects. Second, an otherwise moot case should not be dismissed if the challenged action is, quote, “capable of repetition yet evading review,” unquote. For example, a pregnant woman’s challenge to a law limiting her right to obtain an abortion can be resolved even after the pregnancy has concluded, because the term of a pregnancy is often much shorter than a complete trial and appeal process. Third, an otherwise moot case should not be dismissed if the mootness arises from the defendant’s voluntary cessation of the alleged misconduct. Fourth, in a properly certified class action lawsuit, the fact that the named plaintiff’s claims have become moot does not warrant dismissal of the entire suit. Although mootness is often described as a mandatory constraint imposed by Article III, these exceptions suggest that it is subject to more prudential considerations than other justiciability doctrines.

In addition, some justices have argued that mootness considerations are reduced if a case becomes moot after the Supreme Court has granted _certiorari_, even though nothing prevents the Court from dismissing _certiorari_ even if the dispute technically remains justiciable. Finally, if a party that prevailed in a lower court moots a case while an appeal is pending, the Supreme Court has held that it is appropriate for the appellate court to vacate the decision below and remand with instructions to dismiss, lest the prevailing party game the system to protect her lower-court victory from appellate challenge. For example, if an employer prevails in a lawsuit seeking to block a controversial labor practice in the lower courts, and then stops the challenged practice before the Supreme Court can review the lower courts’ ruling, the Supreme Court will vacate the decisions below and remand with instructions to dismiss the suit as moot.&#x20;

Mootness doctrine is closely related to the more general ban on advisory opinions that the Supreme Court has read into the case-or-controversy requirement, and that most of the more specific justiciability doctrines seek to vindicate. Unlike many state courts, federal judges and Supreme Court justices are not allowed, at least in a judicial capacity, to answer hypothetical questions, pass upon the constitutionality of proposed legislation or executive branch action, or otherwise issue legal opinions outside the context of resolving concrete cases or controversies. The ban on advisory opinions does not mean that every statement in a federal judicial opinion must resolve a concrete dispute. The key is whether the court’s judgment does so. But without an underlying case or controversy to resolve, a federal court violates Article III by purporting to exercise judicial power to answer a legal question, no matter its importance.

### III. Adverseness

Finally, although it is often understood as part of the ban on advisory opinions, the Supreme Court has separately emphasized that cases or controversies must also be meaningfully adverse. For example, a suit brought by a plaintiff at the request of the defendant, who also financed and directed the litigation, does not present a live controversy even if all of the other justiciability doctrines are satisfied, because there is no genuine adversary issue between the parties. The adverseness requirement does not mean that all federal judicial proceedings must have two sides. For example, federal magistrates issue search warrants _ex_ _parte_, and temporary restraining orders are also usually issued after only one side has been heard. In both contexts, though, the initial _ex_ _parte_ adjudication is permissible only because it is ancillary to a subsequent, adversarial dispute that satisfies Article III’s case-or-controversy requirement.

## Political-Question Doctrine

### I. _Baker v. Carr_

The political-question doctrine has its origins in the Supreme Court’s decision in _Marbury versus Madison_, in which Chief Justice Marshall distinguished between the kinds of disputes that are appropriate for courts to resolve and the kinds of disputes that are committed to the discretion of other governmental actors. In general, the doctrine considers an array of circumstances that implicate whether a particular suit involves the courts in what is properly understood as an exercise of judicial power, or whether it seeks something different. In _Baker versus Carr_, the Court described the doctrine as, quote, “essentially a function of the separation of powers,” unquote. This recognizes the limits that the Constitution imposes upon courts and ensures that courts accord appropriate respect to the other branches’ exercise of their own constitutional powers.

To that end, _Baker_ identified six different factors for courts to consider in ascertaining whether a particular dispute presents a non-justiciable political question. In descending order of importance and certainty, those factors are, quote, “a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate political department; or a lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards for resolving the issue; or the impossibility of deciding without an initial policy determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion; or the impossibility of a court's undertaking independent resolution without expressing lack of the respect due coordinate branches of government; or an unusual need for unquestioning adherence to a political decision already made; or the potentiality of embarrassment from multifarious pronouncements by various departments on one question,” unquote. Unless one of these factors is present, the court should not dismiss the case for non-justiciability on the ground of a political question. As the _Baker_ Court noted, quote, “the doctrine of which we treat is one of ‘political questions,’ not ‘political cases,’” unquote.

### II. _Luther v. Borden_ and _Nixon v. United States_

Although _Baker_ identified six different factors, the Supreme Court has generally relied only upon the first two to justify dismissal of specific disputes. For example, in _Luther versus Borden_, the Court considered its authority to decide which of two competing bodies was the duly elected government of the state of Rhode Island. The _Luther_ Court held that this issue was a nonjusticiable political question, because it identified a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate political department with regard to disputes arising under the Guarantee Clause of Article IV, which guarantees “to every state in the Union, a Republican Form of Government.” According to the Supreme Court, if, as in _Luther_, there was some question as to which was the properly elected legislature of a state, the Guarantee Clause left the decision to Congress, through its power to choose which delegation to seat in the House and Senate. And in _Nixon versus United States_, the Court identified a similar commitment in Article I’s provision that the Senate has the “sole Power to try all Impeachments,” holding that federal courts lacked the power to review the means by which the Senate conducted the trial of a federal judge who had been impeached by the House of Representatives. In these cases, the interpretation of the Constitution to confer decision-making authority exclusively upon a different government actor necessarily deprives the federal courts of jurisdiction over the dispute.

### III. _Vieth v. Jubelirer_ and _League of United Latin American Cities v. Perry_

The more controversial prong of the political-question doctrine is the second one, which similarly forecloses federal jurisdiction over cases that lack judicially discoverable and manageable standards. In these circumstances, no specific provision of the Constitution deprives the federal courts of adjudicatory power. Rather, the dispute is understood as not presenting a justiciable controversy because there is no judicially enforceable rule to govern the outcome. For example, in his opinion for a four-Justice plurality in _Vieth versus Jubelirer_, Justice Scalia argued that challenges to extreme partisan gerrymandering by state legislatures were not justiciable. Even assuming that extreme partisan gerrymandering is unconstitutional, Scalia explained, there was no obvious means by which courts could differentiate between maps for congressional and state legislative districts that violated the Constitution and those that did not. And in _League of United Latin American Cities versus Perry_, a four-Justice plurality held that the same conclusion applied even when a state voluntarily chose to engage in unquestionably partisan redistricting for a second time during the same census period.

### IV. _Zivotofsky v. Clinton_

Aside from its hostility to partisan gerrymandering claims, however, the Supreme Court has generally been far more skeptical of the political-question doctrine than the lower federal courts and has rarely applied it outside the gerrymandering context since _Baker_ was decided in 1962. In its 2012 ruling in _Zivotofsky versus Clinton_, the Court reiterated its responsibility to decide cases that are properly before it, even if it would rather avoid deciding them. The political-question doctrine, the Court emphasized, is a narrow exception to that rule.&#x20;

In _Zivotofsky_ itself, for example, the Court reversed a lower-court ruling that had dismissed as a political question a dispute over whether U.S. citizens born in Jerusalem were entitled to have their passport identify their place of birth as being in Israel. Although the Executive Branch had taken the position for decades that Jerusalem was not formally part of Israel (and refused to indicate otherwise on passports issued by the State Department), a 2002 act of Congress had purported to require the State Department, whenever a qualifying citizen requested it, to note the place of birth as Jerusalem comma Israel. As Chief Justice Roberts wrote for the majority, even though the case presented novel and difficult constitutional questions as to the scope of Congress’s and the President’s constitutional authority, resolving those questions, quote, “is what courts do,” unquote.\
