# Federal Executive Power

## Executive Power Over Domestic Affairs

### I. Take Care Clause

Structurally, the most important of the president’s constitutional powers is the authority to enforce federal law, to, quote, “take care that the laws be faithfully executed,” unquote. Among other things, the Take Care Clause vests in the president the power to set enforcement priorities within the executive branch and to issue executive orders implementing the president’s enforcement responsibilities. The Take Care Clause has also been interpreted by the executive branch to allow the president, in certain circumstances, to decline to enforce statutes that the president reasonably believes to be unconstitutional. The Supreme Court has never weighed in on whether this interpretation is correct, or whether, instead, the president has a constitutional obligation to enforce all laws passed by Congress.

A related but distinct authority that courts have derived from the Take Care Clause is prosecutorial discretion. Simply put, the president generally has the constitutional authority to decline to prosecute criminal offenses against the United States for whatever reason. _See, e.g._, _United States v. Cox_, 342 F.2d 167 (5th Cir. 1965) (_en banc_).Whether the Take Care Clause also means that the president can more generally decline to enforce statutes to which the president has policy objections, but not constitutional objections, is less clear. This likely depends upon the extent to which the relevant statutes create mandatory, rather than permissive, duties. _See, e.g._, _Adams v. Richardson_, 480 F.2d 1159 (D.C. Cir. 1973) (_en banc_) (_per curiam_).

### II. Reprieves and Pardons

Article II also empowers the president to grant **reprieves or pardons**for offenses against the United States, except in cases of impeachment. Although there is some debate over whether a president can pardon himself, the president’s exercise-pardon power is otherwise nearly absolute and cannot generally be circumscribed by Congress or reviewed by the courts. _See United States v. Klein_, 80 U.S. (13 Wall.) 128 (1872). Nor does the Constitution limit the reasons why a president may choose to give a pardon. Instead, the principal constraint on the pardon power is politics, and the specter that abuses of the pardon power could provide a ground for impeachment. _See Ex parte Grossman_, 267 U.S. 87 (1925).

### III. Appointments Clause

The president also has the authority under the Appointments Clause of Article II to appoint, subject to the Senate’s advice and consent, ambassadors, ministers, judges, and thousands of other federal officers. The Constitution draws an essential but elusive distinction between **principal** officers, who must be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate, and **inferior** officers, whose appointments can be vested by Congress in the president alone, the heads of government departments, or the courts, all without Senate confirmation. Although the Supreme Court has never articulated a clear test for distinguishing principal and inferior officers, it is safe to say that officers who are subject to supervision by other executive branch officers besides the president generally fall on the inferior side of that line. _See Edmond v. United States_, 520 U.S. 651 (1997). Those who have the last word for the executive branch on matters within their authority are usually principal officers, including, for example, the members of the president’s cabinet.

The distinction between principal and inferior officers has some significance with respect to the Appointments Clause. But its true importance is with respect to the most commonly contested of the president’s constitutional authorities in the domestic sphere, the president’s power not just to appoint federal officers, but to remove them. The Constitution says nothing explicit about removal, except insofar as it authorizes the impeachment of federal civil officers, and not just the president and vice president, for, quote, “treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors,” unquote. Nevertheless, the Supreme Court has consistently read into the structure of Article II a series of complex rules about both the president’s authority to unilaterally remove government officers and Congress’s power to circumscribe that authority.

For example, with regard to principal executive branch officers, the Supreme Court has held that they must be subject to removal by the president at will. _Myers v. United States_, 272 U.S. 52 (1926). The Supreme Court has also held that Congress has the constitutional authority to require good cause before inferior executive branch officers can be removed. But only if this does not excessively intrude into the president’s ability to control the executive branch, and only if that officer is subject to removal by an officer who serves at the will of the president. Indeed, the debate over the removal of executive branch officers has become a flashpoint for defenders of the unitary executive theory, under which the president must have the ability to directly supervise and control the entire executive branch. For example, in _Morrison versus Olsen_, 487 U.S. 654 (1988), the Supreme Court upheld a 1978 statute that created an independent counsel with the power to investigate and prosecute misconduct by senior executive branch officials, including the president, and who could only be removed for good cause as determined by a special three-judge judicial panel. But _Morrison_ has been heavily criticized on the ground that it tolerates too significant a dilution of executive power, and it remains controversial today. _See, e.g._, _Free Enter. Fund v. Pub. Co. Accounting Oversight Bd._, 561 U.S. 477 (2010).

A similar debate extends to so-called independent agencies, which are, in most cases, agencies within the executive branch that are administered by individuals with at least some protection from removal by the president, including the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Federal Trade Commission, and other similar entities. The Supreme Court has expressly upheld the constitutionality of such an arrangement, at least if the agency is headed by a multi-member body. _See_ _Humphrey’s Executor v. United States_, 295 U.S. 602 (1935). Whether Congress can create an independent agency helmed by a single individual who does not serve at the pleasure of the president is an open, and deeply disputed, question. Between them, the president’s control over the appointment of federal officers, and the limits on Congress’s power to interfere with their removal, are key features of the president’s power to control the administrative state.

## Executive Power Over Foreign Affairs

### I. Foreign Affairs

With regard to foreign affairs in general, the two express powers the Constitution grants to the president are the power to make treaties, subject to the consent of two-thirds of the Senate, and the power to receive ambassadors from foreign sovereigns. Courts have also recognized the president’s power to enter into non-treaty executive agreements. Although executive agreements, unlike treaties, aren’t federal law for purposes of the Supremacy Clause, they can nevertheless play an important role in formalizing executive-branch policy and in justifying the judicial displacement of contrary state law. For example, in _American Insurance Association versus Garamendi_, 539 U.S. 396 (2003), the Supreme Court held that a non-treaty agreement between the United States, Germany, and a handful of other countries to govern the resolution of Holocaust-era insurance claims overrode a California state law that authorized suits by families of Holocaust victims against insurers.

In _Zivotofsky versus Kerry_, 135 S. Ct. 2076 (2015), the Supreme Court also derived from these powers the power to grant formal recognition to a foreign sovereign. In that case, Congress had sought to provide by statute that children of U.S. citizens born in Jerusalem could note their place of birth as being in Israel, even though the executive branch does not recognize Jerusalem as being part of Israel and so refused to honor the statute. After holding that such a lawsuit was justiciable and did not present a political question, the Supreme Court struck down the statute. The Court concluded that it interfered with the president’s unilateral and preclusive power not only to recognize foreign sovereigns, but to maintain that recognition over time.

### II. Military

Closely related to the president’s constitutional authority over foreign affairs is the president’s authority over the military. The Commander-in-Chief Clause provides that, quote, “The President shall be Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States, and of the Militia of the several States, when called into the actual Service of the United States,” unquote. There is widespread consensus that the Commander-in-Chief Clause guarantees civilian superintendence of the military and places that control in the hands of a single person. There’s also little question that, although the clause refers specifically to the Army and Navy, it also encompasses the Air Force, the Coast Guard, and any other branches of the military Congress chooses to create.

Whether the Commander-in-Chief Clause confers additional power on the president beyond the general superintendence of the military is a matter of continuing debate and controversy. The Supreme Court has recognized that the president has the inherent constitutional authority to **repel sudden attacks**. _See The Prize Cases_, 67 U.S. (2 Black) 635 (1863). However, the Court did not specify whether that authority came from the Commander-in-Chief Clause, specifically, or from the structure of Article II, more generally. But on the basis of this authority, presidents have also claimed the authority to conduct a range of military actions not expressly authorized by Congress, including attacking pirates, rescuing U.S. citizens abroad, making at least some military deployments, and engaging in some unilateral uses of offensive force that could not be justified solely on the basis of self-defense. The Supreme Court has repeatedly refused to draw a bright line between the President’s unilateral self-defense authority and circumstances in which Congress must affirmatively authorize the use of force.

### III. War and National Security

Some presidents have also argued that, in addition to bestowing unilateral substantive war powers upon the president, the Commander-in-Chief Clause also limits Congress’s ability to place restrictions on the president’s conduct in matters implicating war and national security. For example, the Justice Department under President George W. Bush argued that statutes that, among other things, barred the torture of individuals in U.S. custody, prohibited the collection of foreign intelligence surveillance without a warrant, and limited the government’s ability to detain U.S. citizens without congressional authorization, were all unconstitutional insofar as they interfered with the president’s constitutional authority as Commander in Chief. Although the Supreme Court has never expressly addressed this claim, it has suggested that the president, quote, “may not disregard limitations that Congress has, in proper exercise of its own war powers, placed on his powers,” unquote. _Hamdan v. Rumsfeld_, 548 U.S. 557, 593 n. 23 (2006).

The Supreme Court has also recognized that, at least where Congress has authorized it, the president has the power to detain as enemy combatants individuals who are members of nations or organizations with which the United States is at war, even U.S. citizens, Thus, in _Hamdi versus Rumsfeld_, 542 U.S. 507 (2004), the Court upheld the detention of a U.S. citizen captured while allegedly fighting with Taliban forces against the United States in Afghanistan. The Court also held, however, that a citizen detainee has a right under the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment to a meaningful opportunity to challenge the factual basis for his or her detention before a neutral decisionmaker. And in _Boumediene versus Bush_, 553 U.S. 723 (2008), the Court held that non-citizens detained at Guantánamo Bay are protected by the Constitution’s Suspension Clause, such that a statute that took away the jurisdiction of federal courts to hear lawsuits challenging their detention without providing an adequate substitute was unconstitutional. However, the Court didn’t explain whether non-citizens held elsewhere outside the United States would have a similar entitlement to judicial review. Although that question remains unanswered, _Hamdi_ and _Boumediene_ together suggest that the president’s powers over enemy combatants are not unfettered, and that the courts have a meaningful role to play in holding the government to account in at least some military-detention cases.

