# Separation of Powers and Federalism

## Federal Interbranch Relationships

### I. Non-Delegation Doctrine

A good example of a separation-of-powers constraint falling into the first of Jackson’s three categories is the **non-delegation doctrine**, pursuant to which the Constitution imposes limits on the regulatory power that Congress can delegate to the other branches. Much of the modern administrative state, for example, depends upon the idea that Congress can delegate rulemaking and adjudicatory authority to administrative agencies, to set things like emissions standards for vehicles and to adjudicate labor disputes. But as the Supreme Court has suggested, Congress must provide some **intelligible principle** that limits the delegation’s scope. In practice, this has proven a fairly modest constraint. For example, in _Mistretta versus United States_, the Supreme Court upheld Congress’s delegation of power to the U.S. Sentencing Commission to fashion guidelines that would govern sentencing in federal criminal cases, even though the delegation left virtually all of the substantive policy decisions to the Commission in the first instance.\[488 U.S. 361 (1989).]

### II. Congress's Powers

Some of the other checks and balances are expressly set forth in the Constitution in a manner that leaves them generally free from legal uncertainty. For example, the president has the power to veto legislation passed by Congress and can do so for any reason, whether the president believes the legislation is constitutional or not. \[U.S. Const. art. I, § 7, cl. 2.] Congress, in turn, has the power to override the veto if two-thirds of both the House and Senate concur. \[U.S. Const. art. I, § 7, cl. 2.] Congress also has the power to simply not legislate. Nothing in the Constitution requires Congress to pass any legislation. And, to that end, nothing in the Constitution requires Congress to fund the federal government.

Congress also has the power to remove all federal officers. Article II, Section 4, provides that the President, Vice President, and civil officers of the United States shall be removed from office upon impeachment by a majority of the House and conviction by two-thirds of the Senate for treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors. As part of Congress’s power to supervise the other branches of government, the Supreme Court has also sustained Congress’s broad oversight authority, through which it’s allowed to conduct investigations with any reasonable connection to either its legislative or impeachment authorities. \[_See, e.g._, _McGrain v. Daugherty_, 273 U.S. 135 (1927).] Thus, Congress has the power, in appropriate cases, to subpoena witnesses, to take testimony under oath, and to hold in contempt those who wrongly refuse to comply or otherwise defy Congress’s investigation. And members of Congress are protected from civil or criminal liability for their conduct in the course of their official duties through the Speech or Debate Clause of Article I.

### III. Executive Privilege and Absolute Immunity

The president, in turn, is protected by **executive privilege**, which generally protects from compulsory disclosure the contents of internal, confidential executive-branch deliberations. \[_See United States v. Nixon_, 418 U.S. 683 (1974).] However, executive privilege is qualified, not absolute. It can be overcome, for example, if the privileged material is key evidence in a criminal prosecution. \[_See United States v. Nixon_, 418 U.S. 638 (1974).] The president is also protected by **absolute immunity**. As the Supreme Court held in _Nixon versus Fitzgerald_, the president cannot be held personally liable for any wrongdoing falling within the outer perimeter of his or her official duties as president, whether the lawsuit seeks damages, an injunction, or any other type of relief. \[457 U.S. 731 (1982).] That immunity has important exceptions, though. For example, even a sitting president can be sued for misconduct for which the president was personally responsible that pre-dates his or her time in office. \[_See Clinton v. Jones_, 520 U.S. 681 (1997).] And although there’s a rich debate over whether a sitting president can be criminally indicted, there’s widespread agreement that absolute immunity does not extend to congressional investigations and impeachment. Thus, although the president also has the power to grant reprieves and pardons for offenses against the United States, the president cannot do so in cases of impeachment.

Although the Supreme Court has declined to extend the president’s absolute immunity to other officers, it has recognized that prosecutors are entitled to absolute immunity at least when exercising prosecutorial functions, and that other executive branch officers, including law-enforcement officers, are entitled to qualified immunity. \[_See Harlow v. Fitzgerald_, 457 U.S. 800 (1982); _Imbler v. Pachtman_, 424 U.S. 409 (1976).] Under that doctrine, an officer can be held liable for damages only if the plaintiff can demonstrate that the officer violated well-established statutory constitutional rights known to a reasonable person. \[_Harlow v. Fitzgerald_, 457 U.S. 800 (1982).]

### IV. Limited Judicial Immunity

Finally, the Supreme Court has also recognized a limited judicial immunity doctrine under which judges can’t be sued for damages for actions taken pursuant to their judicial power. \[_See, e.g._, _Stump v. Sparkman_, 435 U.S. 349 (1978).] Unlike other immunity doctrines, however, this one doesn’t apply to suits for other forms of relief, such as injunctions.

## Nation and States in a Federal System

### I. Supremacy Clause

The Constitution’s single most important constraint on states is the Supremacy Clause of Article VI, which provides that federal law, including the Constitution, treaties, and statutes, are the supreme law of the land. Judges in every state are bound by federal law. \[U.S. Const. art. VI, cl. 2.] The Supremacy Clause is the source of preemption doctrine, which generally provides that a state law that conflicts with the text or purpose of a federal law is unconstitutional, no matter the wisdom or provenance of the relevant rules. The Supreme Court has identified four types of preemption: **Expresspreemption**, when a federal law specifically provides that it’s displacing state law; **conflict** **preemption**, when it’s impossible to comply with both a federal and state law; **field** **preemption**, when Congress has regulated a substantive area so pervasively that it has left no room to the states; and **regulatory** **preemption**, when Congress has delegated to an administrative agency the power to make rules that affect one of the previous three types of preemption. The Supreme Court cannot resolve conflicts of authority regarding the wisdom or need of either of the conflicting policies at issue. The compact between the states creating the federal government resolves such conflicts as a matter of supremacy. \[_Franklin Nat’l Bank v. New York_, 347 U.S. 373, 378-79 (1954).]

### II. Structural Constraints

Separate from the Supremacy Clause, the Constitution also enacts a series of structural constraints on state regulatory power, through Article I, Section 10. Among other things, states cannot make treaties, coin money, enact bills of attainder or _ex post facto_ laws, impair contracts, or grant titles of nobility. Article I, Section 10 also prohibits states, at least without congressional consent, from taxing imports or exports, keeping troops or ships of war, entering into agreements with other states or foreign countries, or engage in war unless the United States is actually invaded or is in imminent danger.

### III. Constraint on Imposing Additional Qualifications on Candidates for Federal Office

In addition to the textual limits imposed by the Supremacy Clause and Article I, Section 10, the Supreme Court has also identified two additional means through which the federalism structure imposes limits on the states in relation to the federal government. First, in _U.S. Term Limits, Incorporated versus Thornton_, the Court held that the Constitution bars states from imposing additional qualifications on candidates for federal office beyond those prescribed in the Qualifications Clauses of Article I. Thus, in _Thornton_, although Arkansas had amended its state constitution to impose term limits on state and federal officials, the Court held that, at least as applied to federal officials, the amendment violated the federal Constitution. \[514 U.S. 779 (1995).]

### IV. Constraint on Regulating Interstate Commerce

Second, and related, the Court has also read into the Interstate Commerce Clause a constraint on the ability of states to regulate interstate commerce when Congress has not done so. This is alternatively known as the Dormant Commerce Clause or the Negative Commerce Clause. Under this approach, state or local laws that unduly burden interstate commerce are unconstitutional. To decide whether a state or local law imposes an undue burden, courts first look to whether the law discriminates against out-of-staters. If not, then a state or local law that burdens interstate commerce will be upheld if the benefits outweigh the burdens. If so, however, then the laws are virtually _per_ _se_ invalid and will only be upheld if they are necessary to achieve an important government purpose. \[_City of Philadelphia v. New Jersey_, 437 U.S. 617 (1978).] There are two important exceptions to this rule: First, Congress can affirmatively authorize states to regulate and discriminate against interstate commerce. Second, a state is not subject to the Dormant Commerce Clause when it’s acting as a market participant, rather than a regulator. For example, a state can choose to only buy and serve wines produced within the state at official state functions. In that context, even though it’s discriminating against interstate commerce, it’s doing so as a buyer of goods, not as a regulator.

### V. Privileges and Immunities Clause

The Constitution also imposes federalism-based rules on how states interact with other states and citizens thereof. Most importantly, the Privileges and Immunities Clause of Article IV has been interpreted to limit the ability of state and local governments to discriminate against citizens of other states with regard to fundamental rights or important economic activities. In _Supreme Court of New Hampshire versus Piper_, for example, the U.S. Supreme Court invalidated a New Hampshire law that conditioned admission to the bar on residency in the state. \[470 U.S. 274 (1985).] To similar effect, a state that charges a higher professional licensing fee to out-of-staters than to in-state residents also violates the Privileges and Immunities Clause. In both cases, it was significant to the Court that a state was seeking to interfere with the ability of out-of-state citizens to earn a livelihood. This doesn’t mean that all discrimination against out-of-state citizens is unconstitutional, however. States can charge higher use fees for public parks to out-of-staters; and, perhaps most importantly, states can charge higher tuition to out-of-state students at public universities. In both cases, the Privileges and Immunities Clause is not offended because there’s no fundamental right to use a public park or attend a state university.

### VI. Full Faith and Credit Clause

Finally, the Full Faith and Credit Clause of Article IV also regulates relations between the states by requiring states to recognize other states’ public acts, records, and judicial proceedings. \[U.S. Const. art. IV, § 1.] Thus, a judgment obtained in the courts of one state will typically be subject to enforcement in courts of another state, so long as the judgment is not in direct contravention of the strong public policy of the enforcing state.

## Federalism-Based Constraints on Federal Power

### I. Traditional Government Functions

For a time, the Supreme Court had also identified an additional limit on federal regulation in the Tenth Amendment, which provides that, quote, “The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the states, are reserved to the states respectively, or to the people,” unquote. In _National League of Cities versus Usery_, the Supreme Court held that, even if a statute was an otherwise valid exercise of Congress’s enumerated regulatory power, it violated the Tenth Amendment if it impeded **traditional government functions**. \[426 U.S. 833 (1976).] The Court in _National League of Cities _held that the minimum-wage and maximum-hour provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act, which the Court had previously upheld as a valid exercise of Congress’s Interstate Commerce Clause authority, couldn’t be applied to state governments. \[_United States v. Darby_, 312 U.S. 100 (1941).] But this reasoning was short-lived. Nine years later, the Court overruled _National League of Cities_ in _Garcia versus San Antonio Metropolitan Transportation Authority_, holding Congress can apply valid statutes to state and local governments, the Tenth Amendment notwithstanding. \[469 U.S. 528 (1985).]

### II. Anticommandeering Doctrine

Instead, the only separate constraint on federal power provided by the Tenth Amendment today comes through the **anticommandeering doctrine**. That doctrine bars Congress from dictating to states either what a state’s legislative policy on a particular topic should be, or how the state’s law-enforcement officers should exercise their discretion. For example, in _New York versus United States_, the Supreme Court struck down a federal statute that required New York to take title to low level radioactive waste produced and stored within the state. \[505 U.S. 144 (1992).] The Court held that although Congress had the power to prevent New York from shipping the waste elsewhere, it could not commandeer the state’s policy choice about what to do thereafter. And in _Printz versus United States_, the Court held that Congress could not direct state and local law-enforcement officers to conduct, even on a temporary basis, the background checks required by new gun-control legislation. \[521 U.S. 898 (1997).] Although Congress can incentivize state and local law-enforcement officers to enforce federal law, and although they can choose to do so themselves, the Tenth Amendment forbids Congress from commanding them to do so.

Whereas the Tenth Amendment bars Congress from commandeering state legislatures and executive officers, state **courts** aren’t similarly protected. The Supremacy Clause expressly provides that state courts are bound by federal law. The Supreme Court has interpreted that language to mean that state courts can’t discriminate against federal claims and must generally hear them absent a valid excuse. For example, it doesn’t violate the Supremacy Clause for a state court to dismiss a federal claim on _forum non conveniens_ grounds, but it does violate the Supremacy Clause for a state court to dismiss a federal claim that is against the public policy of the state. \[_Testa v. Katt_, 330 U.S. 386 (1947).]

### III. Intergovernmental Immunity

This same non-discrimination principle lies at the heart of the doctrine of intergovernmental tax immunity, which differentiates between when states and the federal government can tax each other, and when they can’t. The two guiding principles are reciprocity and non-discrimination. For example, states can tax federal employees if the federal government taxes state employees, and the state doesn’t tax federal employees any differently from how it taxes others. But if a state attempts to tax a federal employee or instrumentality in a manner that’s either non-reciprocal or discriminatory, the tax is unconstitutional in violation of the Supremacy Clause. \[_Davis v. Michigan_, 489 U.S. 803 (1989).]
